---
title: 'Topic 3'
hide_page_title: false
show_sidebar: '1'
hide_git_sync_repo_link: false
---

## **Experiencing Emotion**

Now that you understand what’s happening inside your body when you are angry or embarrassed, or experiencing some other emotion, maybe you can see why we often find it so hard to control our emotions. Of course this leads to the question “Should we try to control our emotions?” Or should we just accept them as natural and inevitable? What is the proper role of emotions in our life? For example, imagine you are angry, very angry. Should you suppress and deny your anger out of fear of what you might do? Or should you “blow off steam” and freely express your true feelings?

Consider the following arguments *(adapted from Philipchalk, 1988, p. 114 ff):*

### **What is the Proper Role of Emotion?**

#### ***No Role:***

It is not hard to see that emotions are not only frequently unpleasant, but are also a source of conflict. *Anger* causes us to say things we later regret; *fear* of others inhibits our honesty; and even anticipated *happiness* may blind us to the harmful effects of our actions. We speak of being “swayed by our emotions,” indicating they caused us to do or say something we wouldn’t have done otherwise. Emotions are often unpredictable, making it difficult to arm ourselves against them. They vary with our physical and mental condition, with the amount of sleep we’ve had, our blood sugar level, and a host of environmental factors. They have a clear physiological “animal-like” component. And they are part of our fallen nature. Paul warns us, *“Now those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires” (Gal. 5:24)*. No doubt Paul recognized that emotions arising from our physical bodies frequently play an important role in leading us to *“practice the very evil that I (we) do not wish” (Rom. 7:19).* Surely such an unpredictable and potentially dangerous influence should be discounted in favor of our more God-like rational faculties; isn’t the “cool intellect” superior to the “hot-head?”

Furthermore, since emotions are such an elusive and private matter, the direction they give to behavior is easily misinterpreted, sometimes with disastrous results. For example, we might misinterpret physiological arousal as attraction. *(Psychologists Dutton and Aron (1970) found that male subjects meeting an attractive woman on a high bridge felt more attracted to her than subjects meeting her on a lower bridge).* Or we might misinterpret our physical attraction as love. *(Psychiatrist Scott Peck (1978) argues that the experience of “falling in love” is inevitably sexual).* Particularly important for Christians is the danger of misinterpreting an emotional response as the voice of God. Some Christians frequently attempt to determine God’s will by looking for an inner feeling. They may even base life-changing decisions on fleeting inner impressions of peace, unsettledness, or excitement. This can be extremely dangerous. Such feeling may be little more than expressions of their own inner wishes or fears, or simply physiological arousal that has been mislabeled.

To summarize, emotions are unreliable, easily misinterpreted, and a tool for possible manipulation. They are deeply rooted in our animal-likeness—our physical bodies. As such they should be brought into subjection and perhaps ignored or entirely minimized. In short, it would appear from these considerations that emotions should have no legitimate role in the regulation of behavior.

#### ***Important Role:*** 

The first thing to note with regard to the importance of emotion is that they appear to be part of God’s design for us. God has chosen to form us as emotional beings as well as rational and volitional ones. Although we are fallen, and therefore our capacities of thought and will, as well as our emotional responses, are imperfect, we are created in God’s image nevertheless. The bible ascribes emotions to God. Although some people may dismiss these references as anthropomorphisms, God certainly acts as thought He felt emotions like anger, sadness, and joy. Furthermore, Jesus took on an emotion-feeling body, and expressed a full range of emotions (possibly more than most men in contemporary Western culture). In addition, the fruit of the Spirit (Gal. 5:22-23) includes several blessings with strong emotional components (e.g., joy, peace). Whatever their weaknesses, emotions cannot be dismissed as wholly sinful.

One of the important early findings of modern psychology was the discovery that emotions must not be completely ignored. To deny and suppress them is to court harm. This does not mean that we should give free expression to every feeling we have. Psychological health doesn’t require that we blowup in anger every time that someone crosses us. But neither should we deny, especially to ourselves, that we are angry. Anger can be redirected to constructive ends; it can be controlled through cognitive strategies such as refusing to dwell on the situation that produced it. The Apostle Paul seems to take a similar position when he says, *“Be angry and yet do not sin” (Eph. 4:26)*, indicating that while anger is probably inevitable, the sinful response in thought or behavior is not.

Of course there is a positive side to emotions. They provide the flavor, the resonance, the texture, and the color in an otherwise dull existence. One of the main features that distinguish a person from a machine, which might be capable of many human feats, is the person’s sentient or feeling ability, the person’s capacity to experience emotion. Emotions are the source of much that is pleasant and good in life. Christians find joy and peace in serving God. Even so-called negative emotions have their value. We can direct hatred towards evil; anger can motivate us to overcome injustice; and fear can drive us to God.

Thus emotions are an inevitable part of the God-ordained human condition. They provide the highs as well as the lows in our experience, and their recognition (although not necessarily their uncontrolled expression) is necessary for our health. Although they may frequently lead us astray, and may potentially be the source of unwanted influence, we are fallen creatures, and our other faculties, rational and volitional, are also imperfect. Emotions must be trained. As C.S. Lewis noted, we must be educated to *“feel pleasure, liking, disgust, and hatred at those things which really are pleasant, likable, disgusting, and hateful” (The Abolition of Man, [1943] 1978, p. 15)*. For Lewis, trained emotion not the lack of emotion is the essential mark of the virtuous person. The maturing person will show greater and greater appropriate emotionality.

Despite controversy at the theoretical level concerning the exact relationship between our thoughts and other components of emotions, the work of Stanley Schacter and Jerome Singer (see [*Schachter-Singer Theory of Emotion*](https://www.thoughtco.com/schachter-singer-theory-4691140)) has clearly indicated the importance of mental responses. We probably have the potential for a great deal more control over our emotions than we usually admit.

[plugin:content-inject](_activities)
